Lacrimal gland
Lacrimal apparatus of the right eye.
The lacrimal gland is to the upper left.
The right side of the picture is towards
the nose.
Tear system.
a = lacrimal gland
b = superior lacrimal punctum
c = superior lacrimal canal
d = lacrimal sac
e = inferior lacrimal punctum
f = inferior lacrimal canal
g = nasolacrimal canal
Details
Artery Lacrimal artery
Vein
Superior ophthalmic vein
Lacrimal gland
The lacrimal glands are paired exocrine glands, one for each
eye, found in most terrestrial vertebrates and some marine
mammals, that secrete the aqueous layer of the tear film.[1] In
humans, they are situated in the upper lateral region of each
orbit, in the lacrimal fossa of the orbit formed by the frontal
bone.[2] Inflammation of the lacrimal glands is called
dacryoadenitis. The lacrimal gland produces tears which are
secreted by the lacrimal ducts, and flow over the ocular surface,
and then into canals that connect to the lacrimal sac. From that
sac, the tears drain through the lacrimal duct into the nose.
Anatomists divide the gland into two sections, a palpebral lobe,
or portion, and an orbital lobe or portion.[3] The smaller
palpebral lobe lies close to the eye, along the inner surface of
the eyelid; if the upper eyelid is everted, the palpebral portion
can be seen.
The orbital lobe of the gland, contains fine interlobular ducts
that connect the orbital lobe and the palpebral lobe.[4] They
unite to form three to five main secretory ducts, joining five to
seven ducts in the palpebral portion before the secreted fluid
may enter on the surface of the eye. Tears secreted collect in the
fornix conjunctiva of the upper lid, and pass over the eye
surface to the lacrimal puncta, small holes found at the inner
corner of the eyelids. These pass the tears through the lacrimal
canaliculi on to the lacrimal sac, in turn to the nasolacrimal
duct, which dumps them out into the nose.[5]
Lacrimal glands are also present in other mammals, such as
horses.
The lacrimal gland is a compound tubuloacinar gland, it is
made up of many lobules separated by connective tissue, each
lobule contains many acini. The acini composed of large serous
cells which, produce a watery serous secretion, serous cells are
filled with lightly stained secretory granules and surrounded by
Structure
Histology
Nerve Lacrimal nerve
Identifiers
Latin
glandula lacrimalis
TA98
A15.2.07.057 (https://ifaa.unifr.
ch/Public/EntryPage/TA98%20
Tree/Entity%20TA98%20EN/15.
2.07.057%20Entity%20TA98%2
0EN.htm)
TA2
6846 (https://ta2viewer.openan
atomy.org/?id=6846)
FMA
59101 (https://bioportal.bioonto
logy.org/ontologies/FMA/?p=cla
sses&conceptid=http%3A%2
F%2Fpurl.org%2Fsig%2Font%
2Ffma%2Ffma59101)
Anatomical terminology
Depicts nerve branches that are involved in the autonomic innervation of the lacrimal
gland. The terminal parts of the pathway are variable between individuals and differ for
the other glands of the deep face.
well-developed myoepithelial cells and a sparse, vascular
stroma. Each acinus consists of a grape-like mass of lacrimal
gland cells with their apices pointed to a central lumen.
The central lumen of many of the units converge to form
intralobular ducts, and then they unite to form interlobular
ducts. The gland lacks striated ducts.
The lacrimal gland receives blood from the lacrimal artery,
which is a branch of the ophthalmic artery. Blood from the
gland drains to the superior ophthalmic vein.
No lymphatic vessels have been observed draining the lacrimal
gland.
The lacrimal gland is innervated by the lacrimal nerve, which is the smallest branch of the ophthalmic
nerve, itself a branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). After the lacrimal nerve branches from the ophthalmic
nerve it receives a communicating branch from the zygomatic nerve. This communicating branch carries
postganglionic parasympathetic axons from the pterygopalatine ganglion. The lacrimal nerve passes
anteriorly in the orbit and through the lacrimal gland providing parasympathetic and sympathetic
innervation to it.
The parasympathetic innervation to the lacrimal gland is a complex pathway which traverses through
numerous structures in the head. Ultimately this two-neuron pathway involving both a preganglionic and
postganglionic parasympathetic neuron increases the secretion of lacrimal fluid from the lacrimal gland. The
Blood supply
Lymphatic drainage
Nerve supply
Parasympathetic innervation
preganglionic parasympathetic neurons are located in the superior salivatory nucleus. They project axons
which exit the brainstem as part of the facial nerve (CN VII). Within the facial canal at the geniculate
ganglion the axons branch from the facial nerve forming the greater petrosal nerve. This nerve exits the
facial canal through the hiatus for the greater petrosal nerve in the petrous part of the temporal bone. It
emerges to the middle cranial fossa and travels anteromedially to enter the foramen lacerum. Within the
foramen lacerum it joins to the deep petrosal nerve to form the nerve of the pterygoid canal and then passes
through this canal. It emerges in the pterygopalatine fossa and enters the pterygopalatine ganglion where the
preganglionic parasympathetic axons synapse with the postganglionic parasympathetic neurons. The
postganglionic neurons then send axons which travel with the zygomatic nerve to enter the inferior orbital
fissure. As the zygomatic nerve travels anteriorly in the orbit it sends a communicating branch to the
lacrimal nerve which carries the postganglionic parasympathetic axons. The lacrimal nerve completes this
long pathway by travelling through the lacrimal gland and sending branches to which it provides
parasympathetic innervation to increase the secretion of lacrimal fluid.
Sympathetic innervation to the lacrimal gland is of less physiologic importance than the parasympathetic
innervation, however there are noradrenergic axons found within the lacrimal gland. Their cell bodies are
located in the superior cervical ganglion.
In contrast to the normal moisture of the eyes or even crying, there can be persistent dryness, scratching,
itchiness and burning in the eyes, which are signs of dry eye syndrome (DES) or keratoconjunctivitis sicca
(KCS). With this syndrome, the lacrimal glands produce less lacrimal fluid, which mainly occurs with aging
or certain medications. The Schirmer test, conducted by placing a thin strip of filter paper at the edge of the
eye, can be used to determine the level of dryness of the eye. Many medications or diseases that cause dry
eye syndrome can also cause hyposalivation with xerostomia. Treatment varies according to aetiology and
includes avoidance of exacerbating factors, tear stimulation and supplementation, increasing tear retention,
eyelid cleansing, and treatment of eye inflammation.[6]
In addition, the following can be associated with lacrimal gland pathology:
Dacryoadenitis
Sympathetic innervation
Clinical significance
Sjögren's syndrome
The ophthalmic artery
and its branches.
 
Nerves of the orbit.
Seen from above.
 
Sympathetic
connections of the
sphenopalatine and
superior cervical
ganglia.
 
The tarsal glands,
etc., seen from the
inner surface of the
eyelids.
Alveoli of lacrimal
gland.
Lacrimal apparatus
Preorbital gland
Accessory lacrimal glands
List of distinct cell types in the adult human body
1. Schwab, Ivan R. (2012). Evolution's Witness : How Eyes Evolved. New York. p. 245.
ISBN 9780195369748.
2. Moore, Keith (2018). Clinically oriented anatomy. Wolters Kluwer. pp. 897–900.
ISBN 9781496347213.
3. Machiele, R (November 2018). "Anatomy Head and Neck". StatPearls [Internet].
PMID 30422509 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30422509).
4. Machiele, R (November 2018). "Anatomy, Head and Neck, Eye Lacrimal Gland".
StatPearls(Internet). PMID 30422509 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30422509).
5. "eye, human."Encyclopædia Britannica. 2010. Encyclopædia Britannica 2010 Ultimate
Reference Suite DVD 2010
Additional images
See also
References
6. Illustrated Anatomy of the Head and Neck, Fehrenbach and Herring, Elsevier, 2012, page
153.
lesson3 (http://www.wesnorman.com/lesson3.htm) at The Anatomy Lesson by Wesley
Norman (Georgetown University) (orbit2 (http://www.wesnorman.com/Images/orbit2.jpg))
Diseases of the lacrimal gland at http://www.academy.org.uk/lectures/barnard11.htm
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lacrimal_gland&oldid=1222895602"
External links
