Urine test strip
The Multistix urine test strip showing the
manufacturer's coloured scale.
Purpose
determine pathological changes
Urine test strip
Leukocytes
  
Nitrite
  
Urobilinogen
  
Protein
  
pH
  
Haemoglobin
  
Specific gravity
  
Ketone
  
Bilirubin
  
Glucose
  
  
  
  
  
Urine test strip
A urine test strip or dipstick is a basic diagnostic tool
used to determine pathological changes in a patient's
urine in standard urinalysis.[1]
A standard urine test strip may
comprise up to 10 different
chemical pads or reagents which
react 
(change 
color) 
when
immersed in, and then removed
from, a urine sample. The test
can often be read in as little as
60 to 120 seconds after dipping,
although certain tests require
longer. Routine testing of the
urine with multiparameter strips
is the first step in the diagnosis
of a wide range of diseases. The
analysis includes testing for the
presence of proteins, glucose, ketones, haemoglobin, bilirubin, urobilinogen,
acetone, nitrite and leucocytes as well as testing of pH and specific gravity or to test
for infection by different pathogens.[2]
The test strips consist of a ribbon made of plastic or paper of about 5 millimetre
wide. Plastic strips have pads impregnated with chemicals that react with the
compounds present in urine producing a characteristic colour. For the paper strips
the reactants are absorbed directly onto the paper. Paper strips are often specific to a single reaction (e.g. pH
measurement), while the strips with pads allow several determinations simultaneously.[2]
There are strips which serve different purposes, such as qualitative strips that only determine if the sample is
positive or negative, or there are semi-quantitative ones that in addition to providing a positive or negative
reaction also provide an estimation of a quantitative result, in the latter the colour reactions are
approximately proportional to the concentration of the substance being tested for in the sample.[2] The
reading of the results is carried out by comparing the pad colours with a colour scale provided by the
manufacturer, no additional equipment is needed.[3]
This type of analysis is very common in the control and monitoring of diabetic patients.[2] The time taken
for the appearance of the test results on the strip can vary from a few minutes after the test to 30 minutes
after immersion of the strip in the urine (depending on the brand of product being used).
Comparison between two reactive
strips, one pathological (to the
left, from a patient with
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus),
and an unreacted strip. From top
to bottom the pathological strip
shows: Leukocytes (-), nitrites (-),
urobilinogen (-), proteins (+), pH
(5), hemoglobin (+), specific
gravity (1.025), ketones (++++),
bilirubin (+), glucose (+++).
Semi-quantitative values are usually reported as: trace, 1+, 2+, 3+ and 4+; although tests can also be
estimated as milligrams per decilitre. Automated readers of test strips also provide results using units from
the International System of Units.[2]
The test method consists of immersing the test strip completely in a well mixed sample of urine for a short
period of time, then extracting it from the container and supporting the edge of the strip over the mouth of
the container to remove excess urine. The strip is then left to stand for the time necessary for the reactions to
occur (usually 1 to 2 minutes), and finally the colours that appear are compared against the chromatic scale
provided by the manufacturer.
An improper technique can produce false results, for example, leukocytes and erythrocytes precipitate at the
bottom of the container and may not be detected if the sample is not properly mixed, and in the same way, if
an excess of urine remains on the strip after it has been removed from the test sample, may cause the
reagents to leak from the pads onto adjacent pads resulting in mixing and distortion of the colours. To
ensure that this does not occur it is recommended the edges of the strip are dried on absorbent paper.[2]
The lungs and kidneys are the main regulators of an organism's acid /
alkali balance. The balance is maintained through the controlled
excretion of acidic hydrogens in the form of ammonia ions,
monohydrogenated phosphate, weak organic acids and through the
reabsorption of bicarbonate through glomerular filtration in the
convoluted tubules of the nephron. The pH of urine normally vary
between 4.5 and 8 with the first urine produced in the morning
generally being more acidic and the urine produced after meals
generally more alkaline.[4] Normal reference values are not provided
for urine pH as the variation is too wide and results have to be
considered in the context of the other quantifiable parameters.[4]
The determination of urinary pH has two main objectives, one is
diagnostic and the other is therapeutic. On the one hand it provides
information regarding the balance between acid and alkali in a patient
and allows identification of the substances that are present in the urine
in crystalline form. On the other hand, certain illnesses require a patient
to keep the pH of their urine within given narrow margins, whether to
promote the elimination of chemotherapeutic agents, avoid the
precipitation of salts that promote the formation of kidney stones, or in
order to facilitate the control of a urinary infection. Regulating diet
mainly controls urinary pH, although using medication can also control
it. Diets rich in animal proteins tend to produce acidic urine, while diets mainly composed of vegetables
tend to produce alkali urine.[4]
Test method
Reactions for generalised tests
pH
Commercial brands measure pH in increments of 0.5 or 1 pH units between pH 5 and 9. In order to
differentiate pH in this wide range it is common to use a double indicator system comprising methyl red and
bromothymol blue.[5] Methyl red produces a colour change from red to yellow in the range of pH 4 to 6
and the bromothymol blue changes from yellow to blue between pH 6 and 9. In the range 5 to 9 the strips
show colours that change from orange at pH 5, passing through yellow and green to dark blue at pH 9.[6]
One of the kidneys' important functions is to reabsorb water after glomerular filtration. The complex process
of reabsorption is usually one of the first renal functions to be affected by disease. The specific gravity of
urine is a measure of its density compared to H2O and depends on the quantity and density of solutes
(molecules with more mass per volume increase measure of specific gravity). The measurement of specific
gravity should not be confused with the measurement of osmotic concentration, which is more related to the
number of particles than with their mass.[7]
The urine test strip test for specific gravity is based on the change in dissociation constant (pKa) of an
anionic polyelectrolyte (poly-(methyl vinyl ether/maleic anhydride)) in an alkali medium that is ionised and
releases hydrogen ions in proportion to the number of cations present in the solution.[6] The greater the
cation concentration of the urine the more hydrogen ions are released, thereby reducing the pH. The pad
also includes bromothymol blue, which measures this change in pH.[6][8] It should be remembered that the
test strip only measures cation concentration, it is therefore possible that urine with a high concentration of
non-ionic solutes (such as glucose or urea) or with high molecular weight compounds (such as the media
used to provide radiographic contrast) will yield a result that will be erroneously lower than that measured
by densitometry. The colours vary from dark blue with a reading of 1.000 to yellow for a reading of
1.030.[8][9]
1. In an alkaline medium
Polyelectrolyte-Hn + Cationsn+ → Polyelectrolyte-Cations + nH+
2. In an alkaline medium
H+ + Bromothymol blue(Blue) → Bromothymol blue-H+
(Yellow)
Elevated protein concentrations produce slightly elevated specific density results as a consequence of the
indicator's protein error; in addition, samples with a pH above 6.5 give lower readings as a result of the
indicator's bias. For this reason the manufacturers recommend that 5 units are added to the specific gravity
reading when the pH is greater than 6.5.[8]
Blood may be present in the urine either in the form of intact red blood cells (hematuria) or as the product of
red blood cell destruction, hemoglobin (hemoglobinuria). Blood present in large quantities can be detected
visually. Hematuria produces cloudy red urine, and hemoglobinuria appears as a clear red specimen. Any
amount of blood greater than five cells per microliter of urine is considered clinically significant; visual
examination cannot be relied upon to detect the presence of blood. Microscopic examination of the urinary
sediment shows intact red blood cells, but free hemoglobin produced either by hemolytic disorders or lysis
of red blood cells is not detected. Therefore, chemical tests for hemoglobin provide the most accurate mean
for determining the presence of blood. Once blood has been detected, the microscopic examination can be
used to differentiate between hematuria and hemoglobinuria.
Specific gravity
Blood
Chemical tests for blood use the pseudoperoxidase activity of hemoglobin to catalyze a reaction between
the heme component of both hemoglobin and myoglobin and the chromogen (a substance that acquires
colour after a chemical reaction) tetramethylbenzidine to produce an oxidized chromogen, which has a
green-blue colour. Reagent strip manufacturers incorporate peroxide, and tetramethylbenzidine, into the
blood testing area. Two colour charts are provided that correspond to the reactions that occur with
hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria and hematuria (RBCs). In the presence of free hemoglobin/myoglobin,
uniform colour ranging from a negative yellow through green to a strongly positive green-blue appears on
the pad. In contrast, intact red blood cells are lysed when they come in contact with the pad, and the
liberated hemoglobin produces an isolated reaction that results in a speckled pattern on the pad. Reagent
strip tests can detect concentrations as low as five red blood cells per microliter; however, care must be
taken when comparing these figures with the actual microscopic values, because the absorbent nature of the
pad attracts some of urine. The terms trace, small, moderate, and large (or trace, 1+, 2+, and 3+) are used
for reporting.
False-positive reactions due to menstrual contamination may be seen. They also occur if strong oxidizing
detergents are present in the specimen container. Vegetable peroxidase and bacterial enzymes, including an
Escherichia coli peroxidase, may also cause false-positive reactions. Therefore, sediments containing
bacteria should be checked closely for the presence of red blood cells. Traditionally, ascorbic acid (vitamin
C) has been associated with false-negative reagent strip reactions for blood. Both Multistix and Chemstrip
have modified their reagent strips to reduce this interference to very high levels of ascorbic acid, and
Chemstrip overlays the reagent pad with an iodate-impregnated mesh that oxidizes the ascorbic acid prior to
its reaching the reaction pad. False-negative reactions can result when urine with a high specific gravity
contains crenated red blood cells that do not lyse when they come in contact with the reagent pad.
Decreased reactivity may also be seen when formalin is used as a preservative or when the hypertension
medication captopril or high concentration of nitrite are present. Red blood cells settle to the bottom of the
specimen container, and failure to mix the specimen prior to testing causes a falsely decreased reading.[10]
With the aid of routine examinations early symptoms of the following four groups can be identified:
Diseases of the kidneys and the urinary tract
Carbohydrate metabolism disorders (diabetes mellitus)
Liver diseases and haemolytic disorders
Urinary infections
Screening parameters: Many renal and urinary tract diseases may be asymptomatic for a long period of time.
Routine urinalysis is recommended as a basic yet fundamental step in identifying renal damage and/or
urinary tract disease at an early stage, especially in high-risk populations such as diabetics, the hypertensive,
African Americans, Polynesians, and those with a family history.[11]
Specific kidney and urinary tract diseases that can be identified include: chronic kidney disease,
glomerulonephritis, proteinuria and haematuria.
Diseases identified
Urinary tract
Protein testing
Of the routine chemical tests performed on urine, the most indicative of renal disease is the protein
determination. Proteinuria is often associated with early renal disease, making the urinary protein test an
important part of any physical examination. Normal urine contains very little protein, usually less than 100–
300  mg/L or 100  mg per 24 hours is excreted. This protein consists primarily of low-molecular-weight
serum proteins that have been filtered by the glomerulus and proteins produced in the genitourinary tract.
Due to its low molecular weight, albumin is the major serum protein found in the plasma, the normal
urinary albumin content is low because the majority of albumin presented in the glomerulus is not filtered,
and much of the filtered albumin is reabsorbed by the tubules. Other proteins include small amounts of
serum and tubular microglobulins. Uromodulin produced by the renal tubular epithelial cells and proteins
from prostatic, seminal, and vaginal secretions. Uromodulin is routinely produced in the distal convoluted
tube, and forms the matrix of casts.
Traditional reagent strip testing for protein uses the principle of the protein error of indicators to produce a
visible colorimetric reaction. Contrary to the general belief that indicators produce specific colours in
response to particular pH levels, certain indicators change colour in the presence of protein even though the
pH of the medium remains constant. This is so because protein accepts hydrogen ions from the indicator.
The test is more sensitive to albumin because albumin contains more amino groups to accept the hydrogen
ions than other proteins. Depending on the manufacturer, the protein area of the strip contains different
chemicals. Multistix contains tetrabromophenol blue and Chemstrip contains 3’,3”,5’,5”-tetrachlorophenol,
3,4,5,6-tetrabromosulfonphthalein. Both contain an acid buffer to maintain the pH at a constant level. At a
pH level of 3, both indicators appear yellow in the absence of protein. However, as the protein
concentration increases, the colour progresses through various shades of green and finally to blue. Readings
are reported in terms of negative, trace, 1+, 2+, 3+ and 4+ or the semi-quantitative values of 30, 100, 300 or
2000 mg/dL corresponding to each colour change. Trace values are considered to be less than 30 mg/dL.
Interpretation of trace readings can be difficult.[12]
Indicator-H+
(Yellow) + Protein → Indicator(Blue-green) + Protein-H+
The major source of error with reagent strips occurs with highly buffered alkaline urine that overrides the
acid buffer system, producing a rise in pH and a colour change unrelated to protein concentration.
Likewise, a technical error of allowing the reagent pad to remain in contact with the urine for a prolonged
period may remove the buffer. False-positive readings are obtained when the reaction does not take place
under acidic conditions. Highly pigmented urine and contamination of the container with quaternary
ammonium compounds, detergents and antiseptics also cause false-positive readings. A false-positive trace
reading may occur in specimens with a high specific gravity.
The presence of blood in the urine is, of all the parameters normally tested, the one that is most closely
related with traumatic damage to the kidneys or the genitourinary tract. The most common causes of
hematuria are: nephrolithiasis, glomerular disease, tumours, pyelonephritis, exposure to nephrotoxins, and
treatment with anticoagulants. Non-pathological hematuria can be observed after strenuous exercise and
during menstruation. The normal number of red blood cells in urine should not usually exceed 3 per high
power field.[13]
A urine test strip showing positive for blood can also indicate hemoglobinuria, which is not detectable using
a microscope due to the lysis of red blood cells in the urinary tract (particularly in alkaline or dilute urine),
or intravascular hemolysis. Under normal conditions the formation of haptoglobin-hemoglobin complexes
Hemoglobin and myoglobin testing
Microphotograph of a macroscopic
hematuria, the biconcave form of the red
blood cells is clearly visible, it is rare to
find examples in such a well conserved
condition.
prevents glomerular filtration, but if the hemolysis is extensive
haptoglobin's uptake capacity is exceeded and hemoglobin can
appear in urine. Hemoglobinuria can be caused by hemolytic
anaemia, blood transfusions, extensive burns, the bite of the
recluse spider (Loxosceles), infections and strenuous exercise.
The urine test strip test for blood is based on hemoglobin's
pseudo peroxidase activity in catalysing a reaction between
hydrogen peroxide and the chromogen tetramethylbenzidine in
order to produce a dark blue oxidation product.[6][13] the
resultant colour can vary between green and dark blue
depending on the amount of hemoglobin.[13]
Catalysed by hemoglobin acting as a peroxidase
H2O2 + Chromogen → Oxidised chromogen
(coloured) + H2O
The reaction is not only catalysed by blood
hemoglobin, other globins with a hem group such as
myoglobin can also catalyse the same reaction.[13]
The presence of myoglobin in urine gives a positive reaction in the test strip's blood test but the urine
appears clear with a red to brown colouration. The presence of myoglobin in place of hemoglobin can be
caused by pathologies associated with muscular damage (rhabdomyolysis), such as trauma, crush
syndrome, prolonged coma, convulsions, progressive muscular atrophy, alcoholism, heroin abuse and
strenuous physical activity.
The haem fraction of these proteins is toxic for the kidney tubules and elevated concentrations can cause
acute kidney injury.
It is possible to use an ammonia sulphate precipitation test in order to distinguish between hemoglobinuria
and myoglobinuria. This consists of adding 2.8gr of ammonia sulphate to 5 mL of centrifuged urine, mixing
well and after 5 minutes filtering the sample and centrifuging again. The hemoglobin precipitates out with
the ammonia sulphate but not the myoglobin. Analysis of the supernatant for blood with a test strip will give
a positive if myoglobin is present and a negative if hemoglobin is present.
The test can give false positives if strong oxidant or peroxide residues are present on the laboratory material
used for the analysis.[13]
Glucose - Identified as Glycosuria
Ketones - Identified as Ketonuria (also see ketoacidosis and ketosis)
Around 30–40% of type I diabetics and around 20% of type II diabetics suffer in time from a nephropathy,
and early recognition of diabetes is therefore of major significance for the further state of health of these
patients.
Carbohydrate disorders
Specific carbohydrate metabolism disorders able to be identified include diabetes mellitus, glucosuria and
ketonuria.
Under normal conditions nearly all the glucose removed in the glomerulus is reabsorbed in the proximal
convoluted tubule. If the blood glucose level increases, as happens in diabetes mellitus, the capacity of the
convoluted tubule to reabsorb glucose is exceeded (an effect known as renal reabsorption threshold). For
glucose this threshold is between 160–180  mg/dL. Glucose concentrations vary in an individual, and a
healthy person can present with transitory glucosuria after a meal high in sugars; therefore the most
representative results come from samples obtained at least two hours after food is eaten.
The detection of glucose by test strips is based on the enzymatic reaction of glucose oxidase. This enzyme
catalyses the oxidation of glucose by atmospheric oxygen to form gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide. A
second linked reaction, mediated by a peroxidase, catalyses the reaction between the peroxide and a
chromogen (a substance that acquires colour after a chemical reaction) to form a coloured compound that
indicates the glucose concentration.[6]
1) Catalysed by glucose oxidase
Glucose + O2 → D-glucono-δ-lactone + H2O2
2) Catalysed by peroxidase
H2O2 + Chromogen → Oxidised chromogen (coloured) + H2O
The reaction is specific for glucose, as occurs in all enzymatic reactions, but it can provide some false
positive results due to the presence of traces of strong oxidising agents or peroxide from disinfectants used
on laboratory instruments.[6]
The term ketones or ketone bodies in reality refers to three intermediate products in the metabolism of fatty
acids; acetone, acetoacetic acid and beta-hydroxybutyric acid. Elevated concentrations of ketones are not
generally found in urine, as all these substances are completely metabolized, producing energy, carbon
dioxide and water. However, the disruption of carbohydrate metabolism can lead to metabolic imbalances
and the appearance of ketones as a by-product of the metabolism of an organism's fat reserves.
An increase in fat metabolism can be the result of starvation or malabsorption, the inability to metabolize
carbohydrates (as occurs, for example, in diabetes) or due to losses from frequent vomiting.
The control of urinary ketone is particularly useful in managing and monitoring diabetes mellitus type 1.
Ketonuria indicates an insulin deficiency that indicates the need to regulate its dosage. An increase in the
blood concentration of ketone produces a water-electrolyte imbalance, dehydration and if not corrected,
acidosis and in the end diabetic coma.
The three ketone compounds appear in different proportions in the urine, although these proportions are
relatively constant in different samples as both the acetone and the beta-hydroxybutyric acid are produced
from the acetoacetic acid. The proportions are 78% beta-hydroxybutyric acid, 20% acetoacetic acid and 2%
acetone.
Glucose test
Ketone test
The test used in the urine test strips is based on the reaction of sodium nitroprusside (nitroferricyanide). In
this reaction the acetoacetic acid in an alkali medium reacts with the sodium nitroprusside producing a
magenta coloured complex:[6][14]
Na2[Fe(CN)5NO] + CH3COCH2COOH + 2Na(OH) → Na4[Fe(CN)5-N=CHCOCH2COOH]
(magenta) + H2O
Sodium nitroprusside + Acetoacetic acid + Alkali medium → Pink-magenta complex +
Water
The test does not measure beta-hydroxybutyric acid and it is only weakly sensitive to acetone when glycine
is added to the reaction. However, as these compounds are derived from the acetoacetic acid their existence
can be assumed and a separate test is not therefore necessary. Those medicines that contain sulfhydryl
groups, such as mercaptoethane sulphonate Na (Mesna) and captopril and L-DOPA can give atypical
colouring. A false negative can occur in samples that have not been adequately stored due to volatilization
and bacterial degradation.
In many liver diseases the patients often show signs of pathology only at a late stage. Early diagnosis allows
appropriate therapeutic measures to be instituted in good time, avoiding consequential damage and further
infections.
Specific liver diseases and haemolytic disorders able to be identified include liver disease, (accompanied by
jaundice), cirrhosis, urobilinogenuria and bilirubinuria.
Bilirubin is a highly pigmented compound that is a by-product of haemoglobin degradation. The
haemoglobin that is released after the mononuclear phagocyte system (located in the liver and spleen)
withdraws old red blood cells from circulation is degraded into its components; iron, protoporphyrin and
protein. The system's cells convert the protoporphyrin into unconjugated bilirubin that passes through the
circulatory system bound to protein, particularly albumin. The kidney is unable to filter out this bilirubin as
it is bound to protein, however, it is conjugated with glucuronic acid in the liver to form water-soluble
conjugated bilirubin. This conjugated bilirubin does not normally appear in the urine as it is excreted
directly from the intestine in bile. Intestinal bacteria reduce the bilirubin to urobilinogen, which is later
oxidised and either excreted with the faeces as stercobilin or in the urine as urobilin.
Conjugated bilirubin appears in urine when the normal degradation cycle is altered due to the obstruction of
the biliary ducts or when the kidney's functional integrity is damaged. This allows the escape of conjugated
bilirubin into the circulation as occurs in hepatitis and hepatic cirrhosis).
The detection of urinary bilirubin is an early indication of liver disease and its presence or absence can be
used to determine the causes of clinical jaundice.
The jaundice produced by the accelerated destruction of red blood cells does not produce bilirubinuria, as
the high serum bilirubin is found in the unconjugated form and the kidneys are unable to excrete it.
Liver and blood disorders
Bilirubin test
The test strips use a diazotization reaction in order to detect bilirubin. The bilirubin combines with a
diazonium salt (2,4-dichloroaniline or 2,6-dichlorobenzene-diazonium-tetrafluoroborate) in an acid medium
to produce an azo dye with colouration that varies from pink to violet:[6]
In acid medium
Bilirubin glucuronide + Diazonium salt→ Azo dye (violet)
False positive reactions can be due to unusual pigments in the urine (for example, yellowy orange
phenazopyridine metabolites, indican and the metabolites of the medicine Lodine (Etodolac)). False
negatives can also be given by poorly stored samples as the bilirubin is photosensitive and undergoes photo
oxidation to biliverdin when it is exposed to light, or hydrolysis of the glucuronide can occur producing free
bilirubin which is less reactive.[6]
Intestinal bacteria convert the conjugated bilirubin that is excreted by the bile duct into the intestine into
urobilinogen and stercobilinogen. Part of the urobilinogen is reabsorbed in the intestine then circulated in
the blood to the liver where it is excreted. A small part of this recirculated urobilinogen is filtered out by the
kidneys and appears in urine (less than 1 mg/dL urine). The stercobilinogen can not be reabsorbed and
remains in the intestine.[15][16]
Any deterioration in liver function reduces its ability to process the recirculated urobilinogen.[15] The excess
that remains in the blood is filtered out by the kidneys and appears in urine. When hemolytic disorders
occur the amount of unconjugated bilirubin that is present in the blood increases causing an increase in
hepatic excretion of conjugated bilirubin, resulting in increased amounts of urobilinogen that in turn causes
an increase in reabsorption, recirculation and renal excretion.[15][16]
The reactions that take place in the test strip vary according to the manufacturer, but in reality there are two
reactions that are most frequently used. Some manufacturers use Ehrlich's reaction (1), in which
urobilinogen reacts with p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde (Ehrlich's reagent) in order to produce colours that
vary from light to dark pink. Other manufacturers use a diazo coupling reaction (2) that uses 4-
methoxybenzene-diazonium-tetrafluoroborate to produce colours that vary from white to pink. The latter
reaction is more specific.[17]
(1) Reaction on Multistix (in acid medium)
Urobilinogen + p-dimethylaminobenzaldehide → Red dye
(2) Reaction on Chemstrip (in acid medium)
Urobilinogen + 4-methoxibenzene-diazonium-tetrafluoroborate → Red azo dye
A number of substances interfere with the Ehrlich reaction on the Multistix strip: porphobilinogen, indican,
p-amino salicylic acid, sulphonamide, methyldopa, procaine and chlorpromazine. The test should be carried
out at room temperature as the reaction's sensitivity increases with temperature. Poorly stored samples can
yield false negative results as the urobilinogen suffers photo oxidation to urobilin that does not react. The
formaldehyde used as a preservative produces false negatives in both reactions.[16]
Urobilinogen test
Urinary infections
Urinary infections can be identified including bacteriuria and pyuria.
The test for nitrites is a rapid screening method for possible asymptomatic infections caused by nitrate-
reducing bacteria. Some of the gram negative bacteria species that most commonly cause urinary tract
infections (Escherichia coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Citrobacter and Proteus) have enzymes that reduce the
nitrate present in urine to nitrite.[18] The test is a rapid screen for possible infections by enteric bacteria, but
it does not replace the urinalysis tests nor microscopic examination as diagnostic tools, nor subsequent
monitoring as many other microorganisms that do not reduce nitrate (gram positive bacteria and yeasts) can
also cause urinary infections.[19][20]
The reactive strips detect nitrite by using the Griess reaction in which the nitrite reacts in an acid medium
with an aromatic amine (para-arsanilic acid or sulphanilamide) in order to form a diazonium salt that in turn
reacts with tetrahydrobenzoquinoline to produce a pink azo dye.[6][20]
1) In an acid medium
Para-arsanilic acid or sulphanilamide + NO−
2 → Diazonium salt
2) In an acid medium
Diazonium salt + tetrahydrobenzoquinoline → Pink azo dye
The nitrite test is not particularly reliable and negative results in the presence of clinical symptoms are not
uncommon, meaning that the test should not be taken as conclusive. Negative results can be obtained in the
presence of non nitrate-reducing microorganisms. Nitrite-reducing bacteria need to remain in contact with
nitrate for long enough to produce detectable amounts (first urine produced in the morning or at least with a
urine retention of 4 hours). Large numbers of bacteria can react to reduce nitrite to nitrogen, which will give
a false negative result. The use of antibiotics will inhibit bacterial metabolism causing negative results even
though bacteria are present. In addition some substances such as ascorbic acid will compete with the Greiss
reaction giving unrepresentatively low readings.[6][20]
It is normal to find up to 3 (occasionally 5) leukocytes per high power field (40X) in a urine sample, with
women having slightly higher results owing to vaginal contamination. Higher numbers indicate urinary
infection. The urine test strip test for white blood cells detects leukocyte esterase, which is present in
azurophilic granules of monocytes and granulocytes (neutrophilic, eosinophilic and basophilic). Bacteria,
lymphocytes and epithelial cells from the genitourinary tract do not contain esterases.[21] Neutrophil
granulocytes are the leukocytes most commonly associated with urinary infections. A positive test for
leukocyte esterase normally indicates the presence of bacteria and a positive nitrite test (although it is not
always the case). Infections caused by Trichomonas, Chlamydia and yeasts produce leukocyturia without
bacteriuria. The inflammation of the renal tissues (interstitial nephritis) can produce leukocyturia, in
particular toxic interstitial nephritis with predominant eosinophils.[21]
The test for leukocyte esterase is purely indicative and should not be solely relied on for diagnosis, as it
does not replace microscopic or urine culture examinations.[19]
Nitrites test
Leukocytes test
A sample of urine sediment from a patient
suffering from a urinary infection, it is
possible to see leukocytes (small round
and granular), erythrocytes (small round
and biconcave) and epithelial cells (large
and polyhedral). The test for leukocyte
esterase is indicative and does not
replace microscopic examination of
urine.[19]
The urine test strip reaction is based on the action of leukocyte
esterase in catalysing the hydrolysis of an ester of
indolecarboxylic acid. The indoxyl that is liberated combines
with a diazonium salt in order to produce a violet coloured
azole dye.[21]
1) Reaction catalysed by leukocyte esterase
Indolecarboxylic acid ester → Indoxyl +
Acid
2) In acid medium
Indoxyl + Diazonium salt → Violet azole dye
The esterase reaction needs about 2 minutes to take place. The
presence of strong oxidising agents or formaldehyde can cause
false positives. False negative results are associated with
elevated concentrations of protein (greater than 500  mg/dL),
glucose (greater than 3 g/dL), oxalic acid and ascorbic acid.
Urine with a high specific gravity can also cause leukocyte
crenation, which can impede the liberation of the esterases.[22]
The detection limit of a test is the concentration at which the test starts to turn from negative to positive.
Although the detection limit may vary between urine samples, the detection limit is defined as the
concentration of the analyte that results in a positive reaction in 90% of the examined urines.
Detection limit
Parameter
Reference range
Practical detection limit
Specific Gravity
Reference range
Physiological range
1.016–1.022
1.002–1.035
Range: 1.000–1.030
pH value
First morning urine
During the day
5–6
4.8–7.4
Range: 5–9
Leukocytes
Reference range
Grey zone
< 10 Leu/μL
10–20 Leu/μL
10–25 Leu/μL
Nitrite
–
0.05 mg/dL (11 μmol/L)
Protein
Albumin
< 2 mg/dL
6 mg/dL
Glucose
First morning urine
During the day
< 20 mg/dL
< 30 mg/dL
40 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L)
Ketones
Acetoacetic acid
Acetone
< 5 mg/dL
–
5 mg/dL (0.5 mmol/L)
40 mg/dL (7 mmol/L)
Urobilinogen
< 1 mg/dL
0.4 mg/dL (7 μmol/L)
Bilirubin
< 0.2 mg/dL
0.5 mg/dL (9 μmol/L)
Blood
Erythrocytes
Haemoglobin
0–5 Ery/μL
–
5 Ery/μL
0.03 mg/dL Hb
[23]
Medical uses
Urine test strips can be used in many areas of the healthcare chain including screening for routine
examinations, treatment monitoring, self-monitoring by patients and/or general preventive medicine.
Urine test strips are used for screening both in hospitals and in general practice. The aim of screening is
early identification of likely patients by examination of large groups of the population. The importance of
screening for diabetes and kidney disease amongst high-risk populations is becoming very high.
Treatment monitoring with the aid of urine test strips allows a health professional to check on the results of
the prescribed therapy, and if necessary to introduce any changes into the course of therapy.
Self-monitoring with urine test strips under the guidance of a health professional is an effective method for
monitoring the disease state. This applies particularly to diabetics, where the idea of self-monitoring of the
metabolic status (determinations of glucose and ketones) is self-evident.
In veterinary medicine, especially in cats and dogs, the test strip can be used for urinalysis.
In many cultures urine was once regarded as a mystical fluid, and in some cultures it is still regarded as such
to this day. Its uses have included wound healing, stimulation of the body's defences, and examinations for
diagnosing the presence of diseases.
It was only towards the end of the 18th century that doctors interested in chemistry turned their attention to
the scientific basis of urinalysis and to its use in practical medicine.
1797 - Carl Friedrich Gärtner (1772–1850) expressed a wish for an easy way of testing urine
for disease at the patient's bedside.[24]
1797 - William Cumberland Cruikshank (1745–1800) described for the first time the property
of coagulation on heating, exhibited by many urines.
1827 - English physician Richard Bright describes the clinical symptom of nephritis in
“Reports of Medical Cases.”
1840 - The arrival of chemical urine diagnostics aimed at the detection of pathological urine
constituents
1850 - Parisian chemist Jules Maumené (1818–1898) develops the first “test strips” when he
impregnated a strip of merino wool with “tin protochloride” (stannous chloride). On
application of a drop of urine and heating over a candle the strip immediately turned black if
the urine contained sugar.
1883 - English physiologist George Oliver (1841–1915) markets his “Urinary Test Papers”
approx. 1900 - Reagent papers become commercially obtainable from the chemical
company of Helfenberg AG.
Screening
Treatment monitoring
Self-monitoring
Veterinary
History
1904 - A test for the presence of blood by a wet-chemical method using benzidine became
known.
approx. 1920 - Viennese chemist Fritz Feigl (1891–1971) publishes his technique of “spot
analysis".
1930s - Urine diagnostics makes major progress as reliability improves and test performance
becomes progressively easier.
1950s - Urine test strips in the sense used today were first made on industrial scale and
offered commercially.
1964 - The company Boehringer Mannheim, today Roche, launched its first Combur test
strips.
Even though the test strips have changed little in appearance since the 1960s, they now contain a number of
innovations. New impregnation techniques, more stable colour indicators, and the steady improvement in
colour gradation have all contributed to the fact that the use of urine test strips has now become established
in clinical and general practice as a reliable diagnostic instrument. The parameter menu offered has steadily
grown longer in the intervening decades.
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is known to interfere with the oxidation reaction of the blood and glucose pad on
common urine test strips. Some urine test strips are protected against the interference with iodate, which
eliminates ascorbic acid by oxidation.[25] Some test strips include a test for urinary ascorbate.
During routine screening, if a positive test for leukocytes, blood, protein, nitrite, and a pH greater than 7 is
identified, the urine sediment may be microscopically analysed to further pinpoint a diagnosis.
Automatic analysis of urine test strips using automated urine test strip analysers is a well-established practice
in modern-day urinalysis. They can measure calcium, blood, glucose, bilirubin, urobilinogen, ketones,
leukocytes, creatinine, microalbumin, pH, ascorbic acid and protein.[26]
1. Yetisen A. K. (2013). "Paper-based microfluidic point-of-care diagnostic devices". Lab on a
Chip. 13 (12): 2210–2251. doi:10.1039/C3LC50169H (https://doi.org/10.1039%2FC3LC5016
9H). PMID 23652632 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23652632).
2. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 53–76. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved March 13, 2012.
3. http://www.seg-social.es/ism/gsanitaria_es/ilustr_capitulo6/cap6_7_analisorina.htm Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20110316235758/http://www.seg-social.es/ism/gsanitaria_es/ilu
str_capitulo6/cap6_7_analisorina.htm) 2011-03-16 at the Wayback Machine language =
Spanish
4. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 56–57. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 13 March 2012.
5. ADW Diabetes. (https://www.adwdiabetes.com/product/1638/bayer-multistix-reagent-strips)
Ascorbic acid interference
Urinary sediment
Automated analysers
References
6. "Bayer Multistix reagent strips" (https://web.archive.org/web/20120518075149/http://2ndchan
ce.info/oxalate-dogMultistixSOP.pdf) (PDF). Archived from the original (http://www.2ndchanc
e.info/oxalate-dogMultistixSOP.pdf) (PDF) on 2012-05-18. Retrieved 2013-04-02.
7. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "4" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
8. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 75–76. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
9. "Urine specific gravity" (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003587.htm).
Medline Plus. Retrieved 30 March 2013.
10. Urinalaysis and Body Fluids Sixth Edition by Susan King Strasinger and Marjorie Schaub Di
Lorenzo
11. "Your Kidneys and How They Work" (https://web.archive.org/web/20110411044707/http://kid
ney.niddk.nih.gov/kudiseases/pubs/yourkidneys/index.htm#rate). National Kidney and
Urological Disease Information Clearing House. 2007. Archived from the original (http://kidne
y.niddk.nih.gov/kudiseases/pubs/yourkidneys/index.htm#rate) on 2011-04-11. Retrieved
2009-02-17. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
12. Urinalysis and Body Fluids by Susan King Strasinger and Marjorie Schaub Di Lorenzo
13. Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA (2007). "3" (https://books.google.co
m/books?id=ONKWVHU5SNMC). Campbell-Walsh Urología (in Spanish) (9ª ed.). Editorial
Médica Panamericana. pp. 97–98. ISBN 978-950-06-8268-8. Retrieved 13 March 2012.
14. Tests for the Identification of Aldehydes and Ketones (in Spanish) (https://sites.google.com/si
te/organicaiii/quimica_organica/quimica-organica-iii-nueva/quimica-organica-iii-2009-2012/t
est-analisis-funcional-2011/e7-e8_2011/ensayos-para-el-reconocimiento-de-aldehidos-y-cet
onas)
15. Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA (2007). "3" (https://books.google.co
m/books?id=ONKWVHU5SNMC). Campbell-Walsh Urología (in Spanish) (9ª ed.). Editorial
Médica Panamericana. p. 104. ISBN 978-950-06-8268-8. Retrieved 13 March 2012.
16. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 70–73. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
17. Graff L (1987). "2" (https://books.google.com/books?id=Eq3NnaVyNIQC). Análisis de orina -
Atlas Colour (in Spanish) (1ª ed.). Ed. Médica Panamericana. p. 59. ISBN 978-950-06-0841-
1. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
18. Graff L (1987). "2" (https://books.google.com/books?id=Eq3NnaVyNIQC). Análisis de orina -
Atlas Colour (in Spanish) (1ª ed.). Ed. Médica Panamericana. p. 60. ISBN 978-950-06-0841-
1. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
19. Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA (2007). "3" (https://books.google.co
m/books?id=ONKWVHU5SNMC). Campbell-Walsh Urología (in Spanish) (9ª ed.). Editorial
Médica Panamericana. p. 104. ISBN 978-950-06-8268-8. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
20. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 73–75. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
21. Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 74–75. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
22. Scheer KA, Segert LA, Grammers GL (1984). "Urine leukocyte esterase and nitrite tests as
an aid to predict urine culture results". Lab Med. 15 (3): 186–187.
doi:10.1093/labmed/15.3.186 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Flabmed%2F15.3.186).
23. (2008) Combur-Test: Detailed information. Retrieved February 09, 2009, from Roche
Diagnostics. Web site: http://www.diavant.com/diavant/CMSFront.html?pgid=3,2,14,1
24. Sahnan, Kapil, Blakey, Sarah, Ball, Kathryn, Bagenal, Jessamy, Patel, Biral (January 2013).
"I went to the urologist and this is what I brought". Bulletin of the Royal College of Surgeons
of England. 95 (1): 43–44. doi:10.1308/147363513x13500508918656 (https://doi.org/10.130
8%2F147363513x13500508918656).
25. Brigden ML, Edgell D, McPherson M, Leadbeater A, Hoag G (March 1992). "High incidence
of significant urinary ascorbic acid concentrations in a west coast population—implications
for routine urinalysis" (http://www.clinchem.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=1547565).
Clin. Chem. 38 (3): 426–31. doi:10.1093/clinchem/38.3.426 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fclinc
hem%2F38.3.426). PMID 1547565 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1547565).
26. "Urit-260" (https://archive.today/20120630184852/http://aldalab.com/producto-URIT-260.htm
l). Archived from the original (http://aldalab.com/producto-URIT-260.html) on 2012-06-30.
Retrieved 2013-04-02.
Compendium Urinalysis: Urinalysis with Test Strips. Dr E F Hohenberger, Dr H Kimling
(2002)http://www.diavant.com/diavant/servlet/MDBOutput?fileId=1392
Strasinger SK, Di Lorenzo Schaub M (2008). "5" (https://books.google.com/books?id=uJmK
mviIUdoC&pg=PA53). Análisis de orina y de los líquidos corporales (in Spanish) (5ª ed.).
Editorial panamericana. pp. 56–57. ISBN 978-950-06-1938-7. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
Graff L (1987). "2" (https://books.google.com/books?id=Eq3NnaVyNIQC). Análisis de orina -
Atlas Colour (in Spanish) (1ª ed.). Ed. Médica Panamericana. p. 60. ISBN 978-950-06-0841-
1. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA (2007). "3" (https://books.google.co
m/books?id=ONKWVHU5SNMC). Campbell-Walsh Urología (in Spanish) (9ª ed.). Editorial
Médica Panamericana. p. 104. ISBN 978-950-06-8268-8. Retrieved 14 March 2012.
Urinalysis Strips Instructions (http://www.meditests.com/urinalysis.html)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urine_test_strip&oldid=1224419606"
Further reading
