Gland
Human submandibular gland. At the
right is a group of mucous acini, at the
left a group of serous acini.
Details
Identifiers
Latin glandula
TH
H2.00.02.0.02002 (https://ifaa.u
nifr.ch/Public/EntryPage/PDF/T
H%20Chapter%20H2.00.pdf)
Anatomical terminology
This image shows some of the
various possible glandular
arrangements. These are the simple
tubular, simple branched tubular,
simple coiled tubular, simple acinar,
and simple branched acinar glands.
Gland
A gland is a cell or an organ in an animal's body that produces
and secretes different substances either into the bloodstream or
into a body cavity or outer surface that the organism needs.[1] A
gland may also function to remove unwanted substances such
as urine from the body.[2]
There are two types of gland each with a different method of
secretion. Endocrine glands are ductless and secrete their
products, hormones, directly into interstitial spaces to be taken
up into the bloodstream. Exocrine glands secrete their products
through a duct into a body cavity or outer surface.[2]
Glands are mostly composed of epithelial tissue, and typically
have a supporting framework of connective tissue, and a
capsule.[2]
Every gland is formed by an ingrowth from an epithelial
surface. This ingrowth may in the beginning possess a tubular
structure, but in other instances glands may start as a solid
column of cells which subsequently becomes tubulated.[3]
As growth proceeds, the column of cells may split or give off
offshoots, in which case a compound gland is formed. In many
glands, the number of branches is limited, in others (salivary,
pancreas) a very large structure is finally formed by repeated
growth and sub-division. As a rule, the branches do not unite with
one another. One exception to this rule is the liver; this occurs when
a reticulated compound gland is produced. In compound glands the
more typical or secretory epithelium is found forming the terminal
portion of each branch, and the uniting portions form ducts and are
lined with a less modified type of epithelial cell.[3]
Glands are classified according to their shape.
If the gland retains its shape as a tube throughout it is termed a tubular gland.
Structure
Development
This image shows some of the
various possible glandular
arrangements. These are the
compound tubular, compound acinar,
and compound tubulo-acinar glands.
Here is a diagram that shows the
differences between endocrine and
exocrine glands. The major
difference is that exocrine glands
secrete substances out of the body
and endocrine glands secrete
substances into capillaries and blood
vessels.
In the second main variety of gland the secretory portion
is enlarged and the lumens variously increased in size.
These are termed alveolar or saccular glands.[3]
Glands are divided based on their function into two groups:
Endocrine glands secrete substances that circulate through the
bloodstream. The glands secrete their products through basal lamina
into the bloodstream. Basal lamina typically can be seen as a layer
around the glands to which more than a million tiny blood vessels
are attached. These glands often secrete hormones which play an
important role in maintaining homeostasis. The pineal gland,
thymus gland, pituitary gland, thyroid gland, and the two adrenal
glands are all endocrine glands.
Exocrine glands secrete their products through a duct onto an outer
or inner surface of the body, such as the skin or the gastrointestinal
tract. Secretion is directly onto the apical surface. The glands in this
group can be divided into three groups:
Merocrine glands – cells secrete their substances by exocytosis. (e.g. mucous and serous
glands; also called "eccrine", e.g. major sweat glands of humans, goblet cells, salivary
gland, tear gland and intestinal glands)
Apocrine glands – a portion of the secreting cell's body is lost during secretion. The term
Apocrine gland is often used to refer to the apocrine sweat glands, however it is thought that
apocrine sweat glands may not be true apocrine glands as they may not use the apocrine
method of secretion. (e.g. mammary gland, sweat gland of arm pit, pubic region, skin around
anus, lips and nipples)
Holocrine glands – the entire cell disintegrates to secrete its substances. (e.g. sebaceous
glands: meibomian and zeis glands)
Exocrine glands can further be categorized by their product:
Serous glands secrete a watery, often protein-rich, fluid-like product, e.g. sweat glands.
Mucous glands secrete a viscous product, rich in carbohydrates (such as glycoproteins), e.g.
goblet cells.
Sebaceous glands secrete a lipid product. These glands are also known as oil glands, e.g.
Fordyce spots and meibomian glands.
Types of glands
Endocrine glands
Exocrine glands
Clinical significance
Histopathology of sclerosing
adenosis of the breast.
Adenosis is any disease of a gland. The diseased gland has
abnormal formation or development of glandular tissue which is
sometimes tumorous.[4]
1. "Definition of Gland" (https://web.archive.org/web/20171
214182347/https://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.
asp?articlekey=3594). medicinenet.com. Archived from
the original (https://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.
asp?articlekey=3594) on 14 December 2017. Retrieved
2 May 2018.
2. Saladin, Kenneth S. (2011). Human anatomy (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 73–75.
ISBN 9780071222075.
3. One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the
public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Epithelial, Endothelial and Glandular Tissues".
Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 705–707.
4. Alberts, Daniel (2012). Dorland's illustrated medical dictionary (32nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders/Elsevier. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-4160-6257-8.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gland&oldid=1220909462"
References
External links
